
Leonardo’s portrayal of emotions may have been enhanced by the fact that he was wrestling with his own inner turmoil. His inability to finish the Adoration of the Magi and Saint Jerome may have been caused by, and in turn contributed to, melancholy or depression. His notebooks from around 1480 are filled with expressions of gloom, even anguish. 

On a page that includes a drawing of a water clock and sundial, he lets loose a lament that touches on the sadness of unfinished work: “We do not lack devices for measuring these miserable days of ours, in which it should be our pleasure that they be not frittered away without leaving behind any memory of ourselves in the mind of men.”

He began scribbling the same phrase over and over again, every time he needed to try a new pen nib or to fritter away a moment: “Tell me if anything was ever done . . . Tell me . . . Tell me.” And at one point he jotted a cry of anguish: “While I thought that I was learning how to live, I have been learning how to die.”

Also in his notebooks from around this time are quotes from others that Leonardo found worth recording. One is from a friend who wrote a very personal poem addressed to him. “Leonardo, why so troubled?” the friend writes. On another page is a quote from someone named Johannes: “There is no perfect gift without great suffering. Our glories and our triumphs pass away.” On the same sheet is a transcription from Dante’s Inferno: 

“Put off this sloth,” the master said, “for shame! Sitting on feather-pillows, lying reclined Beneath the blanket is no way to fame— Fame, without which man’s life wastes out of mind,Leaving on earth no more memorial Than foam in water or smoke upon the wind.” 

While he was despairing about, as he saw it, sitting on feather pillows, lying beneath the blanket, and leaving no legacy more lasting than smoke upon the wind, his rivals were enjoying great success. Botticelli, who was definitely not suffering from an inability to churn out finished work, had become the favored painter of the Medici; 

he was commissioned by them to do two major works, Spring and Pallas and the Centaur. In 1478 Botticelli painted a damning public depiction of the conspirators who had assassinated Giuliano de’ Medici and wounded his brother Lorenzo. When the final plotter was captured a year later, Leonardo did a careful sketch of his hanging and jotted details in his notebook, 

as if hoping to do a companion painting (fig. 20). But the Medici gave the commission to someone else. Botticelli was again among the chosen in 1481, when Pope Sixtus IV summoned prominent Florentine and other artists to come to Rome to fresco the walls of the Sistine Chapel; Leonardo was not selected.

As he approached his thirtieth birthday, Leonardo had established his genius but had remarkably little to show for it publicly. His only known artistic accomplishments were some brilliant but peripheral contributions to two Verrocchio paintings, a couple of devotional Madonnas that were hard to distinguish from others being produced in the workshop, a portrait of a young woman that he had not delivered, and two unfinished would-be masterpieces. 

“When a man has learned in Florence as much as he can, if he wishes to do more than live from day to day like an animal, and instead desires to become rich, he must take his departure from that place,” Vasari wrote. “For Florence treats her craftsmen as time treats its own works, which, when perfected, it destroys and consumes little by little.”

It was time for Leonardo to move on. The fact that he was feeling consumed and was in a fragile mental state, filled with fantasies and fears, was reflected in his willingness to leave Florence and in a letter he would write to the person he hoped would be his next patron.



