
Around the time of the Saltarelli allegations, Leonardo was working on a devotional portrait of Saint Sebastian, the third-century martyr who was tied to a tree, shot with arrows, and later clubbed to death during the Roman emperor Diocletian’s persecution of Christians. According to a list of possessions that Leonardo compiled, he drew eight studies for the work, which he apparently never painted. 

The image of Sebastian was considered a protection against the plague, but he was also portrayed with homoerotic undertones by some fifteenth-century Italian artists. Vasari wrote that a Saint Sebastian portrait by Bartolommeo Bandinelli was so erotically charged that “parishioners admitted in the confessional that the beautiful nude prompted unclean thoughts.”

The surviving Leonardo drawings of Sebastian fall into that category of being beautiful and somewhat charged. The boyish-looking saint is depicted nude with a hand tied behind him to a tree, his face filled with emotion. In one of the drawings, now in Hamburg, you can see how Leonardo wrestled with the movements and contortions and twists of Sebastian’s body, sketching his feet in different positions.

Miraculously, one of his missing Saint Sebastian drawings turned up at the end of 2016, when a retired French doctor brought some old artworks that had been collected by his father to an auction house for appraisal. Thaddée Prate, a director at the auction house, spotted one as a possible Leonardo, an attribution that was confirmed by Carmen Bambach, a curator at New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art. 

“My eyes jumped out of their sockets,” Bambach said. “The attribution is quite incontestable. My heart will always pound when I think about that drawing.” The newly discovered drawing shows Sebastian’s torso and chest modeled by Leonardo’s left-handed hatching, but as in the Hamburg version he was still trying different options for the placement of the saint’s legs and feet. 

“It has so many changes of ideas, so much energy in the way he explores the figure,” Bambach said. “It has a furious spontaneity. It’s like glancing over his shoulder.” In addition to showing us Leonardo energetically exploring ideas on paper, the discovery signifies that, even today, there are things about Leonardo that we can find anew.



