
Leonardo went on to paint the sky in the Adoration of the Magi and some highlights of the human figures and parts of the architectural ruins. Then he stopped.

Why? One possible reason is that the task he undertook became overwhelming for a perfectionist. As Vasari explained about Leonardo’s unfinished works, he was stymied because his conceptions were “so subtle and so marvelous” that they were impossible to execute faultlessly. 

“It seemed to him that the hand was not able to attain to the perfection of art in carrying out the things which he imagined.” According to Lomazzo, the other early biographer, “he never finished any of the works he began because, so sublime was his idea of art, he saw faults even in the things that to others seemed miracles.”

Perfecting the Adoration of the Magi must have been especially daunting. There were originally more than sixty characters in his underdrawing. As he went along, he reduced this number by turning some groups of fighters or builders in the background into fewer large-scale characters, but that still left more than thirty to be rendered. He was intent on making sure each one reacted emotionally to the others so that the painting would feel like a coherent narrative and not a random assortment of isolated characters.

Even more complex were the lighting challenges, made all the more difficult by his obsession with optics. On the bottom of a notebook page from around 1480 that shows the mechanisms of the crane that Brunelleschi used to erect Florence’s cathedral dome, Leonardo sketched a diagram of how light rays hit the surface of a human eye and are focused inside the eyeball.

In painting the Adoration of the Magi, he wanted to convey the power of the light that shone down from heaven with the Epiphany and how each rebound of reflected light affected the coloration and gradation of each shadow. “He must have faltered at the thought of how to balance the reflections that bounce from one figure to another and to control the myriad variables of light, shade, and emotions for such a multitude,” according to the art historian Francesca Fiorani. “Unlike any other artist, he could not ignore an optical problem.”

It was an unnerving set of iterative tasks. All thirty characters had to reflect light and project shade that would influence, and be influenced by, the light and shadows of those around them. They also had to initiate and reflect emotions, which in turn affected, and were affected by, the emotions emanating from those around them.

There was another reason, one even more fundamental, that Leonardo did not complete the painting: he preferred the conception to the execution. As his father and others knew when they drew up the strict contract for his commission, Leonardo at twenty-nine was more easily distracted by the future than he was focused on the present. He was a genius undisciplined by diligence.

He seems to have illustrated this personal trait, consciously or not, in an apparent self-portrait he drew on the far right side of the painting (figs. 2 and 15). A boyish character, pointing toward Jesus but looking away, is in the location often used by Renaissance artists to insert a likeness of themselves. (Botticelli portrays himself in the same location in his Adoration of 1475.) The boy’s nose and curls and other attributes match the description and other presumed depictions that exist of Leonardo.

This boy is what Alberti referred to as “the commentator,” the person who is in a picture but out of it, who is not part of the action but instead connects to the world beyond the frame. His body is facing Jesus, his arm points that way, and his right foot is angled as if he had been moving in that direction. 

But his head is turned sharply to the left, looking toward something else, as if he had become distracted. He has paused before walking into the action. His eyes are looking far away. He is part of the scene but detached from it, an observer and commentator who is immersed but marginalized. He is, like Leonardo, of this world but apart from it.

Seven months after Leonardo was commissioned to create the painting, his payments ended. He had stopped work. When he departed Florence for Milan shortly thereafter, he left the unfinished painting with his friend Giovanni de’ Benci, the brother of Ginevra.

The monks of San Donato subsequently commissioned Botticelli’s protégé Filippino Lippi to paint a substitute. The young Lippi had learned from Botticelli the fine art of flattery; as in Botticelli’s earlier version, Lippi’s Adoration of the Magi features likenesses of many members of the Medici family. 

Leonardo, who lacked that instinct to cater to patrons when painting, had paid no such homage to the Medici in his unfinished Adoration or in any of his other works. That was likely one reason Botticelli, Filippino Lippi, and his father, Filippo Lippi, all enjoyed the generous Medici patronage that eluded Leonardo.

In some ways, Filippino Lippi tried to follow Leonardo’s original design in the Adoration he painted as a substitute. The kings kneel before the Holy Family with their gifts, while a cavalcade of onlookers swirl around. Lippi even includes a portrait of a commentator character on the far right, with the exact pose Leonardo had used. 

But Lippi’s commentator is a calm, older sage, not a dreamy and distracted young man. And even though Lippi tried to give his characters some interesting gestures, there is little of the excitement, energy, passions, or movements of the soul that Leonardo had envisaged. 



