One way to appreciate the notebooks is to focus on just one sheet of paper. Let’s pick a large one, twelve-by-eighteen inches, that he composed in about 1490, dubbed by Pedretti a “theme sheet” because it encompasses so many of Leonardo’s interests. (See fig. 24 to follow along.)

On the center-left is a figure Leonardo loved to draw or doodle: a semiheroic, craggy old man with a long nose and jutting chin. Wearing a toga, he looks both noble and slightly comic. In the list of possessions he had brought to Milan in 1482, Leonardo described one drawing as “the head of an old man with an enormous chin,” and we will see variations of this craggy character reappearing often in his notebooks. 

Just below the old man are the trunk and branches of a leafless tree, which blend into his toga and suggest the aorta and arteries of his blood system. Leonardo believed that analogy was a way to appreciate the unity of nature, and among the analogous forms he explored was the branching pattern that could be found in trees, in the arteries of the human body, and in rivers and their tributaries. 

He studied carefully the rules governing these branching systems, such as how the size of each branch relates to the size of the main trunk, artery, or river. On this notebook sheet, he hints at the similarity of such branching patterns in humans and in plants.

Flowing out of the man’s back is a geometrical drawing of a conical shape that contains some equilateral triangles. Leonardo was beginning his long attempt to solve the ancient mathematical challenge of “squaring the circle,” constructing a square that has the same area as a given circle using only a compass and straightedge. He was not great at algebra or even arithmetic, but he had a feel for how geometry could be used to transform one shape into another while keeping the area constant. Scattered on the sheet are geometrical drawings with shaded portions that have the same area.

The conical drawing attached to the man’s back resembles a hill, and Leonardo has it flow into a sketch of a mountainous landscape. The result is a seamless connection of geometry to nature and a glimpse into Leonardo’s art of spatial thinking. 

A clear theme emerges as we look at the flow of this part of the drawing from right to left (the direction in which Leonardo drew). The branches of the leafless tree merge into the man’s body, then into the conical geometrical pattern, and finally into the mountainous landscape. What Leonardo probably began as four distinct elements ended up woven together in a way that illustrates a fundamental theme in his art and science: the interconnectedness of nature, the unity of its patterns, and the analogy between the workings of the human body and those of the earth.

Just below these elements is something simpler to fathom. It’s a quick but energetic sketch of his vision for Ludovico Sforza’s horse monument. With just a few strokes, he is able to convey motion and vitality. Farther down are two heavy-looking mechanical devices, unexplained by any notes, perhaps some system for casting the horse. Barely visible at the bottom of the right half of the sheet is a faint little sketch of a walking horse. 

Next to the centerfold at the bottom are two leafy stems, which have such precise botanical detail that they seem to have been drawn from direct observation. Vasari wrote that Leonardo studiously drew plants, and his surviving drawings show how sharp his eye was in observing nature. His botanical correctness is evident in his paintings, most notably the Louvre version of the Virgin of the Rocks. Continuing his theme of merging patterns in nature and geometry, one of the grass shoots curving from the base of the stems merges into a perfect semicircle drawn with a compass.


On the far right are studies of fluffy cumulus clouds, each with different patterns of light and shading. Below them is a drawing of a column of falling water stirring up turbulence as it plunges into a placid pool; this was a subject that he would still be drawing at the end of his life. And scattered about on the sheet are doodles of other subjects that he would return to often: a bell tower for a church, curls of hair, shimmering branches of foliage, and a lily emerging from swirls of grass.

There is one note on the page that seems disconnected from everything else. It is a recipe for making blond-brown hair dye: “To make hair tawny, take nuts and boil them in lye and immerse the comb in it, then comb the hair and let it dry in the sun.” This may have been a notation in preparation for a court pageant. But it is more likely, I think, that the recipe is a rare intimate jotting. Leonardo was deep into his thirties by now. Perhaps he was resisting going gray.



