
While still living in Florence, Leonardo had sketched a few proposals for clever military devices. One was a mechanism for knocking down the ladders of enemy invaders trying to scale a castle wall (fig. 21). The defenders inside would pull large levers connected to rods that poked through holes in the wall. His drawing includes enlarged details showing how the rods would be attached to the levers plus lively sketches of four soldiers pulling ropes and keeping an eye on the enemy. 

A related idea was for a propeller-like device that would slash away at those who made it to the top of the castle wall. Gears and shafts turned blades, like those of a helicopter, that would swing just above the wall, chopping down unfortunate soldiers trying to climb over. For when it was time to be on the offense, he designed a rolling armored siege machine that placed a covered bridge over the fortified walls of a castle.

The spread of printing presses helped Leonardo pursue additional military ideas after he arrived in Milan. He borrowed some of his concepts from a book by the thirteenth-century scientist Roger Bacon that had a list of ingenious weapons, including “carts and wagons that could move without animal power; devices used to walk on water and to move underneath the water, and contrivances capable of putting man in flight, having a person placed in the center of a mechanical device with artificial wings.”

Leonardo embellished on all of these ideas. He also studied Roberto Valturio’s On the Military Arts, a treatise filled with woodcuts of ingenious weapons. It was published in Latin in 1472 and in Italian in 1483, the year after Leonardo arrived in Milan. He bought both versions, annotated them, and struggled to improve his rudimentary Latin by making lists of the terms in the original book alongside their Italian translations.

Valturio’s book became a springboard for Leonardo’s creativity. For example, Valturio included a drawing of a cart with rotating scythes that was rather tame; each wheel of the clunky cart had only one small, unintimidating blade attached. With his fevered imagination, Leonardo kicked the concept up multiple notches for a fearsome scythed chariot that became one of his most famous—and disconcerting—pieces of military engineering.

Leonardo’s drawings of this scythed chariot, which he made soon after he moved to Milan, feature truly frightening whirling blades jutting out from the wheels. It also has a four-bladed spinning shaft that can project in the front or be dragged behind the chariot. 

He meticulously drew the connection of the gears and cogs to the shafts and wheels, creating artwork so beautiful as to be jarring. The galloping horses and the riders with their billowing capes are dazzling studies of motion, while his hatching strokes create shade and modeling worthy of a museum piece.

One sheet of scythed chariot drawings is especially vivid (fig. 22). On the near side of the moving chariot two bodies lie on the ground, their legs sliced off and the pieces scattered. On the far side he depicts two soldiers just at the moment they are being sliced in half. 

Here is our gentle and beloved Leonardo, who became a vegetarian because of his fondness for all creatures, wallowing in horrifying depictions of death. It is, perhaps, yet another glimpse of his inner turmoil. Within his dark cave was a demon imagination.

Another of his imagined but unbuilt weapons, which likewise blurs the border between practicality and fantasy, is a giant crossbow that he drew in Milan around 1485. The proposed machine is huge: its armature is eighty feet across, and so is the four-wheeled carriage that would roll it onto the battlefield. To put it in perspective, he shows the weapon dwarfing a soldier who is preparing to unleash the trigger.

Leonardo was a pioneer in propounding laws of proportion: how one quantity, such as force, rises in proportion to another, such as the length of a lever. A super-sized crossbow should, he correctly surmised, be able to hurl projectiles that were bigger or went farther. He tried to figure out the correlation between the distance the bowstring was pulled and the force it exerted on the projectile. 

At first he thought that a bowstring pulled back twice as far would exert twice the force. But he realized that rate was thrown off by the bending of the bow as the string was pulled. After various calculations, he finally concluded that the force is proportional to the angle of the string at the point where it is pulled back. Pull the string back hard, and it will make (say) a 90-degree angle; pull back even harder, and perhaps you can get the angle down to 45 degrees. 

A 45-degree angle, he theorized, would deliver twice the force of 90 degrees. That doesn’t turn out to be exactly right; Leonardo did not know trigonometry and thus couldn’t refine the theory. But in concept he was close. He was learning to use geometric shapes as analogues for nature’s forces.

In Leonardo’s design, the bow was to be made with interlocking layers of wood, an early example of lamination. That would make it flexible, springy, and less likely to crack. Its string was pulled back by ropes attached to a large gear-and-screw mechanism, which he detailed in a side drawing. 

Cocked in such a fashion, he wrote, the device should be able to fling “one hundred pounds of stones.” Gunpowder was in common use by then, which would seem to make a mechanical crossbow obsolete. However, if the crossbow had worked, it could have been cheaper, easier, and certainly quieter than cannons using gunpowder.

As with the scythed chariot, a question arises: How serious was Leonardo? Was he merely being clever on paper and trying to impress Ludovico? Was the giant crossbow another example of his ingenuity blurring into fantasy? I believe his proposal was serious. He made more than thirty preparatory drawings, and he detailed with precision the gears, worm screws, shafts, triggers, and other mechanisms. 

Nevertheless, the crossbow should be classified as a work of imagination rather than invention. It was never constructed by Ludovico Sforza. When it was finally built for a television special in 2002, the contemporary engineers were unable to get it to work. During his career, Leonardo would be known for paintings, monuments, and inventions that he conceived but never brought to fruition. The giant crossbow falls into that category.

That was also true, it turned out, for most of the military devices he conceived and drew during the 1480s. “I will make unassailable armored chariots,” he promised in his letter to Ludovico. He did in fact design one, at least on paper. His drawing of an armored tank, which looks like a cross between a turtle and a flying saucer, shows metal plates slanted on an angle that would cause it to deflect enemy projectiles. 

Inside would be eight men, some of them turning cranks to cause the tank to inch ahead, the others firing cannons that project out in all directions. There is one design flaw: a careful look at the crank and gears shows that they would turn the front wheels and the back wheels in opposite directions. Did he draw it that way intentionally so that it could not be easily constructed without his modification? Perhaps. But the issue was moot; the machine was never built.

He had also promised Ludovico, “I will make cannons and artillery of beautiful and useful design that are different from those in common use.” One such attempt was a steam cannon, or architronito, an idea that Leonardo attributed to Archimedes and that was also in Valturio’s book. The concept was that the breach of a cannon would be heated in burning coals until it was super-hot, then a small amount of water would be injected just behind the cannon ball. 

If the ball was held in place for a second or so, enough steam pressure would build up to fire it a few hundred yards when released. Another proposal he drew was for a machine with many cannons, one with racks of eleven cannons each. While one set of cannons was cooling off and being reloaded, the other sets could be firing. It was the precursor to the machine gun.

Only one of Leonardo’s military conceptions is known to have made it off the pages of his notebooks and onto the battlefield, and he arguably deserves priority as its inventor. The wheellock, or wheel lock, which he devised in the 1490s, was a way to create a spark for igniting the gunpowder in a musket or similar hand-carried weapon. When the trigger was pulled, a metal wheel was set spinning by a spring. As it scraped against a stone, it sparked enough heat to ignite the gunpowder. 

Leonardo used components of some of his previous devices, which included spring-powered wheels. One of the assistants who lived in Leonardo’s household at the time was a technician and locksmith named Giulio Tedesco, known as Jules the German, who returned to Germany around 1499 and spread Leonardo’s idea there. The wheellock came into use in Italy and Germany around that time and proved to be influential in facilitating both warfare and the personal use of guns.

Leonardo’s wondrously imaginative giant crossbows and turtle-like tanks show his ability to let fantasy drive invention. But he had not lashed his imagination to practicality. None of his big machines would be deployed in battle by Ludovico Sforza, who did not face a serious confrontation until the French invaded Milan in 1499, at which time he fled the city. As it turned out, Leonardo would not be involved in military activity until 1502, when he went to work for a more difficult and tyrannical strongman, Cesare Borgia.

The only military project Leonardo actually delivered to Ludovico was a survey of the castle’s defenses. He expressed approval of the thickness of the walls, but he warned that the small apertures were directly connected to secret passageways in the castle, which could permit attackers to swarm the castle if breached. While at it, he also noted the proper method for preparing the bath for Ludovico’s young new wife: “four parts of cold water to three parts of hot water.”


