
For the artists and engineers in Florence’s bottegas, working on the Medici pageants and spectacles was a significant component of their job. For Leonardo it was also a joy. He was already making a name as a colorful dresser, fond of brocade doublets and rose tunics, and as a showman adept at imaginative theatrics. 

Over the years, both in Florence and especially after he moved to Milan, he spent time devising costumes, theatrical scenery, stage machinery, special effects, floats, banners, and entertainments. His theatrical productions were ephemeral, and they linger only in sketches in his notebooks.

They can be dismissed as diversions, but they were also an enjoyable way for him to combine art and engineering, and thus they became a formative influence on his personality.

The artisans who created the sets for theatrical events became masters of the rules of artistic perspective that had been refined in the 1400s. The painted scenery and backdrops had to be unified with the three-dimensional stage settings, props, moving objects, and actors. Reality and illusions were blended. 

We can see the influence of these plays and pageants on both Leonardo’s art and his engineering. He studied how to make the rules of perspective work for different vantage points, loved mixing illusion with reality, and delighted in devising the special effects, costumes, scenery, and theatrical machinery. All of this helps to explain many of the sketches and fantasy writings in his notebooks that scholars sometimes find mystifying.

For example, some of the gears and cranks and mechanisms that Leonardo rendered in his notebooks were, I think, theatrical machinery that he encountered or contrived. Florentine impresarios had created ingenious mechanisms, called ingegni, for changing scenery, propelling dazzling props, and turning stages into living paintings. 

Vasari praises a Florentine carpenter and engineer who climaxed a festival show with a scene of “Christ carried upward from a mountain carved of wood and borne to heaven by a cloud filled with angels.”

Likewise, some of the flying contraptions that we find in Leonardo’s notebooks were probably for the amusement of theatrical audiences. The Florentine plays often involved characters and props descending from the heavens or being magically suspended in air. Some of Leonardo’s flying machines were, as we will see, clearly aimed at real human flight. Others, however, are on notebook pages from the 1480s and seem to have a theatrical purpose. 

They feature wings with limited range moved by cranks, and they could not possibly have been propelled into the skies by a human pilot. Similar pages include notes on how to project lights onto a scene and drawings of a hook-and-pulley system to raise actors.

Even Leonardo’s famous drawing of an aerial screw, often touted as the design for the first helicopter, falls into this category of ingegni devised for a theatrical spectacle, I believe. Its spiral mechanism of linen, wire, and cane was, in theory, supposed to turn and bore upward into the air. Leonardo specified certain details, like making sure the linen has “its pores stopped up with starch,” but he showed no method for a human to operate it. 

It is big enough to be amusing but probably not enough to carry a human. In one model, he specified that the “axis will be made of a fine steel blade, bent by force, and when released it will turn the screw.” There were toys at the time that used similar mechanisms. Like some of his mechanical birds, the aerial screw was probably made to transport spectators’ imaginations rather than their bodies.



