
While working as a master painter in Verrocchio’s shop during his late teens and early twenties, Leonardo contributed elements to two paintings: he was responsible for the scampering dog and shiny fish in Tobias and the Angel (fig. 8) and for the angel on the far left in the Baptism of Christ. These collaborations show what he learned from Verrocchio and how he then surpassed him.

The biblical tale of Tobias, which was popular in late fifteenth-century Florence, tells of a boy who is sent by his blind father to collect a debt, accompanied by his guardian angel, Raphael. On the journey they catch a fish, the guts of which turn out to have healing powers, including that of restoring the father’s sight.

Raphael was the patron saint of travelers and of the guild of physicians and apothecaries. The tale of him and Tobias was particularly appealing to the wealthy merchants who had become art patrons in Florence, especially those with traveling sons. Among the Florentines who painted it were Pollaiuolo, Verrocchio, Filippino Lippi, Botticelli, and Francesco Botticini (seven times).

Pollaiuolo’s version (fig. 9) was produced in the early 1460s for the church of Orsanmichele. It was well known to Leonardo and Verrocchio, who was sculpting his statue of Christ and Saint Thomas for a niche of that church’s wall. In producing his own Tobias and the Angel a few years later, Verrocchio engaged in an explicit competition with Pollaiuolo.

The version that came out of Verrocchio’s shop includes the exact same elements as Pollaiuolo’s: 

Tobias and the angel walking hand in hand, a Bolognese terrier scampering alongside, Tobias holding a carp on a stick and strings, and Raphael holding a tin with the fish’s guts, all in front of a meandering river landscape with clumps of grass and clusters of trees. 

And yet it is a fundamentally different painting, in both its impact and detail, in ways that reveal what Leonardo was learning.

One difference is that Pollaiuolo’s version is stiff, while Verrocchio’s conveys movement. As a sculptor, he had mastered the twists and thrusts that impart dynamism to a body. His Tobias leans in as he strides, his cloak billowing out behind him while tassels and threads flutter. 

He and Raphael turn to each other naturally. Even the way they hold hands is more dynamic. Whereas Pollaiuolo’s faces seem vacuous, the body motions in the Verrocchio version connect to emotional expressions, conveying mental as well as physical movements.

Verrocchio, who was more of a sculptor than a painter, developed a reputation for not being a master at portraying nature. True, there is a good raptor sweeping down in his Baptism of Christ, but his way with animals was generally considered “indifferent” and “deficient.”

So it is not surprising that to paint the fish and dog he would turn to his pupil Leonardo, whose eye for nature was proving to be astonishing. Both animals are painted on what was already a finished background landscape; we know this because, as sometimes happened with Leonardo’s experimental mixtures, his paint has become somewhat transparent.

The shiny and shimmery scales of the fish show that Leonardo was already mastering the magic of how light strikes an object and dances to our eyes. Each scale is a gem. The sunshine coming from the top left of the picture produces a mix of light and shade and sparkle. Both behind the gill and at the front of the liquidy eye is a spot of luster. Unlike other painters, Leonardo even took care to render the blood dripping from the fish’s cut belly.

As for the dog prancing just under Raphael’s feet, it has an expression and personality that matches in its charm that of Tobias. In stark contrast to Pollaiuolo’s stiff terrier, Leonardo’s trots naturally and watches alertly. Most notable are its curls. 

Their painstaking design and lustrous lighting match that of the curls above Tobias’s ear, which (an analysis of the left-handed style shows) were also drawn by Leonardo. Swirling and flowing curls, perfectly lit and coiled, were becoming a Leonardo signature.

In this deeply pleasing and sprightly painting, we can see the power of a master-pupil collaboration. Leonardo was already an extreme observer of nature, and he was perfecting the ability to convey the effects of light on objects. Added to that, he had imbibed from Verrocchio, the master sculptor, the excitement of conveying motion and narrative.




