
The culmination of Leonardo’s collaborations with Verrocchio came in the mid-1470s with the completion of the Baptism of Christ, which shows John the Baptist pouring water over Jesus while two angels kneeling beside the River Jordan watch (fig. 10). Leonardo painted the radiant, turning angel on the far left of the scene, and Verrocchio was so awed when he beheld it that he “resolved never again to touch a brush”—or at least that’s what Vasari tells us. 

Even allowing for Vasari’s penchant to mythologize and trot out clichéd themes, there was probably some truth to the tale. Afterward Verrocchio never completed any new painting on his own. More to the point, a comparison between the parts of the Baptism of Christ that Leonardo painted with those done by Verrocchio shows why the older artist would have been ready to defer.

An X-ray analysis of the painting confirms that the angel on the left and much of the background landscape and the body of Jesus were painted with multiple thin layers of oil paint, the pigments highly diluted, stroked on with great delicacy and sometimes dabbed and smoothed by fingertips, a style that Leonardo was developing in the 1470s.

Oil painting had come to Italy from the Netherlands, and Pollaiuolo’s workshop was using it, as was Leonardo. Verrocchio, on the contrary, never embraced the use of oils, and instead continued to use tempera, a mix of water-soluble pigments bound with egg yolks.

The most striking trait of Leonardo’s angel is the dynamism of his pose. Shown from slightly behind in a twisted three-quarter profile, his neck turns to the right as his torso twists slightly to the left. “Always set your figures so that the side to which the head turns is not the side to which the breast faces,since nature for our convenience has made us with a neck which bends with ease in many directions,” 

Leonardo wrote in one of his notebooks. As evident in his Christ and Saint Thomas, Verrocchio was a master of depicting motion in sculptures, and Leonardo became an expert in its painterly conveyance.

A comparison of the two angels shows how Leonardo was surpassing his master. Verrocchio’s angel seems vacant, his face flat, and his only emotion seems to be a sense of wonder that he happens to find himself next to a much more expressive angel. “He seems to look with astonishment at his companion, as at a visitant from another world,” Kenneth Clark wrote, “and, in fact, Leonardo’s angel belongs to a world of the imagination which Verrocchio’s never penetrated.”

Like most artists, Verrocchio drew lines to delineate the contours of his angel’s head and face and eyes. But in Leonardo’s angel, there are no clear edges that delineate the features. The curls dissolve gently into each other and the face, rather than creating a hairline. Look at the shadow underneath the jaw of Verrocchio’s angel, done with visible brushstrokes of tempera paint that create a sharp jaw line.

Then look at Leonardo’s; the shadow is more translucent and blends more smoothly, something that’s easier done with oil. The almost imperceptible strokes are fluid, thinly layered, and occasionally smoothed by hand. The contours of the angel’s face are soft. There are no perceptible edges.

We can also see this beauty in the body of Jesus. Compare his legs, painted by Leonardo, with those of Verrocchio’s John the Baptist. The latter have sharper lines, unlike what a careful observer would see in reality. Leonardo even minutely blurs the curls of Jesus’ exposed pubic hair.

This use of sfumato, the smokiness that blurs sharp contours, was by now a hallmark of Leonardo’s art. Alberti in his treatise on painting had advised that lines should be drawn to delineate edges, and Verrocchio did just that. Leonardo took care to observe the real world, and he noticed the opposite: when we look at three-dimensional objects, we don’t see sharp lines. 

“Paint so that a smoky finish can be seen, rather than contours and profiles that are distinct and crude,” he wrote. “When you paint shadows and their edges, which cannot be perceived except indistinctly, do not make them sharp or clearly defined, otherwise your work will have a wooden appearance.” Verrocchio’s angel has this wooden appearance. Leonardo’s does not.

X-ray analysis shows that Verrocchio, with his lesser feel for nature, had originally begun the background by drawing a few rounded clumps of trees and bushes, more wooden than sylvan. When Leonardo took over, he used oils to paint a richly natural view of a languid but sparkling river flowing through rocky cliffs, echoing his Arno River drawing and foreshadowing the Mona Lisa. Other than Verrocchio’s pedestrian palm tree, the backdrop displays a magical mix of natural realism and creative fantasia.

The geological striations of the rock (except those on the far right, which someone else must have painted) are carefully rendered, though not with the subtlety that Leonardo would later display. As the scene recedes, it gradually blurs, as our eyes would naturally have it, 

into a hazy horizon where the blue of the sky whitens into the mists just above the hills. “The edges of the mist will be indistinct against the blue of the sky, and towards the earth it will look almost like dust blown up,” Leonardo wrote in one of his notebooks.

In painting the background and foreground, Leonardo created the organizing theme of the picture, which is a narrative united by the meandering river. He portrayed the water’s movement with scientific mastery and spiritual profundity, imbuing it with metaphorical power as the lifeblood connecting the macrocosm of the earth and the microcosm in humans. 

The water flows from the heavens and distant lakes, cuts through rocks to form dramatic cliffs and smooth pebbles, and pours from the cup of the Baptist, as if connecting to the blood of his veins. Finally, it swaddles the feet of Jesus and ripples to the edge of the picture, reaching us and making us feel a part of the flow.

There is an inexorable impetus to the water’s flow, and when it is obstructed by the ankles of Jesus it forms swirls and eddies as it proceeds along its course. In these acutely observed vortexes and scientifically accurate ripples, Leonardo delights in what will become his favorite pattern: nature’s spirals. The curls flowing down his angel’s neck look like cascades of water, as if the river had flowed over his head and transformed into hair. 

At the center of the picture is a small waterfall, one of many such depictions Leonardo would produce, in his paintings and notebooks, of water falling into a swirling pool or stream. Sometimes these renderings are scientific, at other times darkly hallucinatory. In this case the falling water seems sprightly; it causes splashes that prance around the eddies like Tobias’s puppy.

With the Baptism of Christ, Verrocchio went from being Leonardo’s teacher to being his collaborator. He had helped Leonardo learn the sculptural elements of painting, especially modeling, and also the way a body twists in motion. 

But Leonardo, with thin layers of oil both translucent and transcendent, and his ability to observe and imagine, was now taking art to an entirely different level. From the mist on the distant horizons to the shadow under the angel’s chin to the water at the feet of Christ, Leonardo was redefining how a painter transforms and transmits what he observes.



 
